Type hint docs (#14253)
mlflow/mlflow: docs/source/model/python_model.rst

MLflow PythonModel Guide
========================

.. contents:: In this section:
  :local:
  :depth: 2

Introduction to MLflow PythonModel
----------------------------------

The :py:mod:`mlflow.pyfunc` module provides :py:func:`save_model() <mlflow.pyfunc.save_model>` and
:py:func:`log_model() <mlflow.pyfunc.log_model>` utilities for creating MLflow Models with the
``python_function`` flavor that contain user-specified code and *artifact* (file) dependencies.
The MLflow PythonModel enables you to implement custom model logic while leveraging MLflow’s 
packaging and deployment capabilities.There are two ways to define a PythonModel: 
Subclassing :py:class:`mlflow.pyfunc.PythonModel <mlflow.pyfunc.PythonModel>` or defining a callable.
This guide provides a complete walkthrough on how to define and use a custom PythonModel.

Define a custom PythonModel
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Option 1: Subclass PythonModel
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> :py:mod:`mlflow.pyfunc` module provides a :py:class:`generic PythonModel class <mlflow.pyfunc.PythonModel>` that can be used to define your own 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :py:mod:`mlflow.pyfunc` module provides a :py:class:`generic PythonModel class <mlflow.pyfunc.PythonModel>` that can be used to define your own 
```

customized model. By subclassing it, the model can be seamlessly integrated with other MLflow components.

Methods of PythonModel:

    - **predict**
        A valid PythonModel must implement the predict method, which defines the model’s prediction logic. This method is called by MLflow when 
        the model is loaded as a PyFunc model using ``mlflow.pyfunc.load_model`` and the ``predict`` function is invoked.
    - **predict_stream**
        The predict_stream method should be implemented if the model is intended for use in streaming environments. MLflow invokes this method 
        when the model is loaded as a PyFunc model with ``mlflow.pyfunc.load_model`` and ``predict_stream`` is called.
    - **load_context**
        Implement the load_context method if the model requires additional context to be loaded. For more details, refer to :py:func:`load_context() <mlflow.pyfunc.PythonModel.load_context>`.

.. tip::

>     Starting from MLflow 2.20.0, ``context`` parameter can be removed from ``predict`` and ``predict_stream`` functions if it is not used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Starting from MLflow 2.20.0, the ``context`` parameter can be removed from ``predict`` and ``predict_stream`` functions if it is not used.
```

    e.g. ``def predict(self, model_input, params)`` is a valid predict function signature.

Below is an example of a simple PythonModel that takes a list of string and returns it.

.. code-block:: python

    import mlflow

    class MyModel(mlflow.pyfunc.PythonModel):
        def predict(self, model_input: list[str], params=None) -> list[str]:
            return model_input

Option 2: Define a callable
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
An alternative way to log a PythonModel is to define a callable that **takes a single argument** and returns a prediction. This callable can be
logged as a PythonModel by passing it to ``mlflow.pyfunc.log_model``.

.. tip::
    Starting from MLflow 2.20.0, you can use @pyfunc decorator on the callable to enable data validation on the input based on the type hints.
    Check :ref:`type hint usage in PythonModel <type-hint-usage-in-pythonmodel>` for more details.

.. code-block:: python

>     def predict(model_input: list[str]) -> list[str]:

Reviewer: Do you want to show the decorator here with the required import path?

        return model_input

Log the model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> PythonModel should be logged as python_function flavor using :py:func:`mlflow.pyfunc.log_model`.

Reviewer: I wouldn't say "python_function flavor" - perhaps just say that we're using the pyfunc module to directly log a custom model.

.. code-block:: python

    import mlflow

    with mlflow.start_run():
        model_info = mlflow.pyfunc.log_model(
            artifact_path="model",
            python_model=MyModel(),
            input_example=input_example,
        )

Validate the model before deployment
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> After logging the model, you can validate the model by loading the model and running predictions. In addition, it's highly recommended to use 

Reviewer: Let's lead with showing the example of using `mlflow.models.predict` in the top section and below mention that you can also locally (or remotely) load the logged model to validate in a new environment whether the model is ready for deployment. I'd show both examples. We should heavily promote the local subprocess with uv here in a distinct section.

:py:func`mlflow.models.predict` API to validate the model dependencies. Check `MLflow Model Validation <../models.html#validate-models-before-deployment>`_
for more details.

.. code-block:: python
    
    import mlflow

    model = mlflow.pyfunc.load_model(model_info.model_uri)
    model.predict(["hello", "world"])

    mlflow.models.predict(
        model_uri=model_info.model_uri,
        input_data=["a", "b", "c"],
        env_manager="uv",
    )

Deploy the model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Final step to use your model in production is to deploy it. Follow `MLflow Model Deployment <../models.html#deployment-to-custom-targets>`_ guide to deploy the model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final step to use your model in production is to deploy it. Follow the `MLflow Model Deployment <../models.html#deployment-to-custom-targets>`_ guide to deploy the model.
```

.. _type-hint-usage-in-pythonmodel:

Type hint usage in PythonModel
------------------------------
Starting from MLflow 2.20.0, type hints support for PythonModel is introduced. You can use type hints to define the input and output types of the model.

> It introduces the following benefits:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Utilizing type hints introduces the following benefits:
```

    - **Data validation**: MLflow validates the input data based on the type hints defined in the model. No matter if the model is a PythonModel instance or a loaded PyFunc model, the input data is consistently validated.

>     - **Type hint inference**: MLflow infers the input and output schema of the model based on the type hints defined in the model, and sets as the model signature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Type hint inference**: MLflow infers the input and output schema of the model based on the type hints defined in the model, and sets that inferred structure as the logged model signature.
```

Supported type hints
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> **Type hint used in the PythonModel must be list[...]** because PythonModel's predict function expects batch input data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Type hints used within the PythonModel's input signature must be of type list[...]** because PythonModel's predict function expects batch input data.
```

The following type hints are supported as the element type of ``list[...]``:

>     - **Basic types**: int, float, str, bool, bytes, datetime.datetime

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **Primitive types**: int, float, str, bool, bytes, datetime.datetime
```

>     - **Container types**: list, dict

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **Collection types**: list, dict
```

>     - **Union types**: Union[type1, type2, ...] or type1 | type2 | ...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **Union types**: ``Union[type1, type2, ...]`` or ``type1 | type2 | ...``
```

    - **Optional types**: Optional[type]

>     - **Pydantic models**: Subclass of pydantic.BaseModel (fields must be of supported types)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Pydantic models**: Subclass of pydantic.BaseModel (fields must be of supported types mentioned in this section)
```

    - **typing.Any**: Any

> Some constraints of type hints usage:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Constraints of type hints usage:
```

    - list[Union[int, str]], list[str | dict[str, int]]...

Below is an example of nested pydantic models as type hints:

.. code-block:: python

    from mlflow.pyfunc.utils import pyfunc
    import pydantic
    from typing import Optional

    class Message(pydantic.BaseModel):
        role: str
        content: str

    class FunctionParams(pydantic.BaseModel):
        properties: dict[str, str]
        type: str = "object"
        required: Optional[list[str]] = None
        additionalProperties: Optional[bool] = None

    class ToolDefinition(pydantic.BaseModel):
        name: str
        description: Optional[str] = None
        parameters: Optional[FunctionParams] = None
        strict: Optional[bool] = None

    class ChatRequest(pydantic.BaseModel):
        messages: list[Message]
        tool: Optional[ToolDefinition] = None

    @pyfunc
    def predict(model_input: list[ChatRequest]) -> list[list[str]]:
        return [[msg.content for msg in request.messages] for request in model_input]

    input_example = [ChatRequest(messages=[Message(role="user", content="Hello")])]
    print(predict(input_example))  # Output: [['Hello']]

> Use type hints in PythonModel
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using type hints in PythonModel
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

    ]
    print(predict(input_example))  # Output: ['Hello', 'Hi']

    # The input_example can also be a list of dict with the same schema as Message
    input_example = [
        {"role": "system", "content": "Hello"},
        {"role": "user", "content": "Hi"},
    ]
    print(predict(input_example))  # Output: ['Hello', 'Hi']

    # If your input doesn't match the schema, it will raise an exception
    # e.g. passing a list of string here will raise an exception
    predict(["hello"])
    # Output: Failed to validate data against type hint `list[Message]`, invalid elements:
    # [('hello', "Expecting example to be a dictionary or pydantic model instance for Pydantic type hint, got <class 'str'>")]

.. note::
    MLflow doesn't validate model output against the type hints, but the output type hint is used for model signature inference.

Pydantic Model type hints data conversion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
For Pydantic model type hints, the input data can be either a Pydantic object or a dictionary that matches the schema of the Pydantic model.
MLflow automatically converts the provided data to the type hint object before passing it to the predict function.

> Such as example in the last section: ``[{"role": "system", "content": "Hello"}]`` is converted to ``[Message(role="system", content="Hello")]`` inside the predict function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If comparing to the example in the last section, ``[{"role": "system", "content": "Hello"}]`` is converted to ``[Message(role="system", content="Hello")]`` within  the predict function.
```

> Below example demonstrates how to use a base class as type hint, while preserving fields in the subclasses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below demonstrates how to use a base class as type hint, while preserving fields in the subclasses.
```

.. code-block:: python

    from pydantic import BaseModel, ConfigDict
    from mlflow.pyfunc.utils import pyfunc

    class BaseMessage(BaseModel):
        # set extra='allow' to allow extra fields in the subclass
        model_config = ConfigDict(extra="allow")

        role: str
        content: str

    class SystemMessage(BaseMessage):
        system_prompt: str

    class UserMessage(BaseMessage):
        user_prompt: str

    @pyfunc
    def predict(model_input: list[BaseMessage]) -> list[str]:
        result = []
        for msg in model_input:

>             if hasattr(msg, "system_prompt"):

Reviewer 2: do we need `hasattr`?

Author: Yes because UserMessage doesn't contain system_prompt field

                result.append(msg.system_prompt)
            elif hasattr(msg, "user_prompt"):
                result.append(msg.user_prompt)
        return result

    input_example = [
        {"role": "system", "content": "Hello", "system_prompt": "Hi"},
        {"role": "user", "content": "Hi", "user_prompt": "Hello"},
    ]
    print(predict(input_example))  # Output: ['Hi', 'Hello']

> Model signature inference based on the type hints
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Model signature inference based on type hints
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

When logging a PythonModel with type hints, MLflow automatically infers the input and output schema of the model based on the type hints defined in the model.

.. note::
    Do not pass ``signature`` parameter explicitly when logging a PythonModel with type hints. If you pass the ``signature`` parameter, 
    MLflow still uses the inferred signature based on the type hints, and raises a warning if they don't match.

> Below table illustrates how type hints map to the schema in the model signature:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The table below illustrates how type hints map to given schemas in model signatures:
```

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 70
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Type hint
     - Inferred schema
   * - list[str]
     - Schema([ColSpec(type=DataType.string)])
   * - list[list[str]]
     - Schema([ColSpec(type=Array(DataType.string))])
   * - list[dict[str, str]]
     - Schema([ColSpec(type=Map(DataType.string))])
   * - list[Union[int, str]]
     - Schema([ColSpec(type=AnyType())])
   * - list[Any]
     - Schema([ColSpec(type=AnyType())])
   * - list[pydantic.BaseModel]
     - Schema([ColSpec(type=Object([...]))]) # properties based on the pydantic model fields

.. warning::

>     Pydantic objects cannot be used in ``infer_signature`` function. To use pydantic objects as model inputs, you must define the type hints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Pydantic objects cannot be used in the ``infer_signature`` function. To use pydantic objects as model inputs, you must define the type hints
```

Extra allowed type hints that don't support data validation or schema inference
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
MLflow also supports using the following type hints in PythonModel, but they are not used for data validation or schema inference, and a
valid model signature or input_example needs to be provided during model logging.

    - pandas.DataFrame
    - pandas.Series
    - numpy.ndarray
    - scipy.sparse.csc_matrix
    - scipy.sparse.csr_matrix

TypeFromExample type hint usage
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
MLflow provides a special type hint, ``TypeFromExample``, which helps convert the input data to match the type of your input example 
during PyFunc prediction. This is useful if you don’t want to explicitly define a type hint for the model input but still want 
the data to conform to the input example type during prediction.
**To use this feature, a valid input example must be provided during model logging.** The input example must be one of the following
types, as the ``predict`` function expects batch input data:

    - list
    - pandas.DataFrame
    - pandas.Series

> Below example demonstrates how to use ``TypeFromExample`` type hint:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below demonstrates how to use the ``TypeFromExample`` special type hint:
```
